[Music]
all right so thanks so much for having
me Thank You Barry and everyone at gray
area for inviting me I'm Angelo wash Co
and I'm a research-based
artist making video games written works
videos performances and interventions
often within videogame and internet
Enclave context today in my talk I'm
going to focus on my projects
investigating niche languages formed in
specific online communities I'll mostly
talk about the game the game which have
any of you had the chance to play it
it's like right around the corner okay
great so you'll have a different
experience probably than this but I want
to talk a lot about that but I have to
give you a little bit of context for
where I'm coming from and how I got
there that project there's also some
adult content in this presentation and
I'll try to give adequate warnings when
we get to it well okay so backing up I'm
going to start with one project very
briefly to give you a sense of the kinds
of processes and politics that were
informing the work that I'll show after
it for four years I created performative
interventions inside world of warcraft
so massively multiplayer online
role-playing game if you're not familiar
so instead of killing enemies and
getting more badass equipment like I had
for the six years prior as a very
serious wild player as the Council on
gender sensitivity and behavioral
awareness and world Warcraft I started
traveling to highly populated virtual
towns in the game to discuss the ways in
which women were treated inside the game
space along with other players Wow has
had a player base that's pretty
notorious for being quite hostile toward
women members of the LGBTQIA community
and people of color the project over
time shifted an intention from initially
wanting to change the communal language
in the space to be more inclusive to
ultimately realizing how colonial that
impulse was and trying to sort of remake
the game in my own perspective and then
sort of shifted away from that to trying
to create a presence and public
visibility for
the issues of exclusivity that players
face in the space by meeting and talking
about it regularly through the four
years of the project the council had
generally appreciated and very active
presence on the primary server that I
played on and an intentional inclusive
guild so cooperative of players was
created as a result of regularly hosting
these conversations as the community
came up with long term ways for the
project to live on without my
facilitation which was pretty much my
goal that's the fastest description of
this project that I've ever given and
there's a lot more nuance and a lot of
self criticality missing from that
explanation if you're interested in the
nuances of the project there's a pretty
comprehensive essay I wrote for creative
time called my talk feminism in world of
warcraft and documentation from the
project on my website okay so in the
midst of that long term project I
started another which also focused on
facilitating dialogue with Nisha
internet communities that are not
inclusive to women starting in 2014 I
became very interested in a figure named
roofie his writing and ideology seem to
overlap with a lot of the men I was
talking to inside Wow who identify as
men's rights activist or members of the
online manosphere so after seeing a lot
of writing circulate on the internet
about his book don't Bank Denmark the
country where I'd just been living I
decided to investigate further and began
to read his books his blogs and his
incredibly active rucifee community
forum in case you're not familiar Russia
has been called the most infamous
misogynist on the internet and since his
time traveling around the world teaching
men how to perform in particular ways in
order to have sex with as many women as
possible across Geographic language and
cultural barriers as quickly as possible
he writes a series of travel guides
called bang day bang bang Iceland
bang Poland bang Ukraine bancolombia
don't bangs Denmark and so on I did not
make this image he's also the founder of
return of Kings a very active online
blog with many writers devoted to neo
masculinity and ideological term used by
Russia and his followers to identify men
who want to return to a radically
traditional family values sort of
America and would like to see women have
the right to vote revokes among many
frankly infuriatingly conservative
things anyway
bangs emerged out of reading his books
blogs and community forum after eating
so much of his writing for his devoted
community of followers one thing really
stuck out to me in Russia's accounts of
his sexual exploits the perspective of
the women he's explicitly talking about
in his books and blogs are never
represented so I decided that I wanted
to create a web and book based project
through which I'd hope to give the
supposedly thousands of women that
Russia has slept with using the
extremely aggressive strategies outlined
in his book an opportunity to
anonymously report their experiences
after pursuing mainstream media
distribution of my call for these women
it occurred to me that Russia knew about
my project as he wrote about it on his
Twitter account his awareness of the
project changed it for me he became less
of an abstract villain that I was free
to run a media savvy smear campaign on
and more of a person and more of a
subject I decided that I should stop
mimicking the shocked media tactics that
frankly his own community would use in a
different way and move toward
investigating further into actually
trying to understand his motivations and
the appeal that he and his practice held
for his growing community of followers
many of whom now make up what is being
politically called the alt-right so I
pursued getting rucifee to do an
interview with me via Skype
this took months of email negotiating
and literally sending him one question
per day over email at his request while
he tested my commitment to the project
and our collaboration the video
interview ended up being accidentally
two hours long and was very exhausting
if you want to see the whole thing
online it's very easy to find I posted
it completely unedited I'm just going to
show a short clip from the interview so
you can get a sense of it it's really
hard to get a good feel for it from two
minutes so I hope the curation that I
made is helpful that I'm going to show
and I do want to say that there is some
sexually explicit talk in this clip we
have a very frank discussion
about orgasms what do you think he's
only might say about the seduction
process and your sexual performance I
would say that they would they would
probably say that I approach them with a
good energy I didn't I didn't scare them
I made them feel comfortable I didn't
come on really strong at the same time I
didn't come in with such a low energy
that they weren't interested I'm really
good at keeping a conversation going
even if the girl is not giving me a lot
that I make everything feel natural from
how I touch and kiss and I mean it's
never it's rarely at a point where a
girl will have to stop and say no I
don't like it when we touch me there
because I can read them I know but based
on how they act how they talk how they
move when they want me to do the next
step and after sex I get lazy because
now I already got most of what I wanted
so I just want to go to have the lowest
possible expectations a where I don't
want to try so it's actually a blessing
and a curse to be good in bed but I'm
not so you mentioned your your orgasm is
of primary importance and that you don't
go down on women that's true
can I ask why we cuz nature has beens
the male orgasm to be more important if
the if right now a magic cloud of gas
surround the earth and infected girls
and prevented them from ever having a
female orgasm again the human species
would go on in still but if this cloud
of gas only affected men and prevented
the male orgasm what would happen this
human species has done is frickin done
therefore nature not me nature has
I declare that the male orgasm is
essential to life to life but the female
orgasm is like a cherry on top you know
if she gets it hey that's great yelling
but if not it doesn't matter so I'm just
I believe in what nature has has said
about it the things that have been said
under the guise of being about nature
all right so this here is a video which
is normally accompanied with audio that
I made from one of the emails I got
nearly daily over the course of the
project from Rich's community members
after the interview this project ended
up taking on a lot of forms
ruch was initially very enthusiastic
about my search and a project in general
probably because of the media attention
and his community initially appreciated
the two-hour long unedited interview
because I acknowledged that I was a
self-identified feminist and Clyde
inclined to disagree with him
but was willing to maintain civility
with regards to my inner question sorry
interview questions and my overall
demeanor
however as mainstream media continued to
be interested in my search for his
partners his community became more more
frustrated that the media had an overall
negative view of Roush despite and
unedited two hour-long interview with
him his community debated my project and
harassed me over email social media
common sections of mainstream news sites
and a massive and still ongoing comment
thread on the Russia forum and
additionally wrote threatening
statements to employers friends peers
and colleagues an attempt to discredit
what I was doing they let me know that
they knew where I lived and worked and
continued to sexually harass me send me
rape and death threats and accuse me of
stalking roof as the project continued
to get more attention Roush himself also
suggested that if I continued my search
he would sue me for libel I'm talking
about this issue not to play up a victim
there it is as I recognize myself
certainly as an agent who started this
whole thing but I want to make it clear
that in this context unlike World of
Warcraft where I'm you know here not
protected by an avatar when I interact
with this online community certainly
there comes a higher risk
as a performer who had seen real impact
on the space and world Warcraft as a
result of my actions of the council and
I usually applied some of the same logic
and strategies to this project without
realizing the primary difference in my
position in these two spaces in wow I
was recognizable as a long-term
high-level member of the community with
high level gear only obtained through
years of commitment to the game clearly
a participant and not an outsider
in Russia knees manosphere I'm an enemy
a symbol of everything wrong in today's
world to them someone who operates
against their values and someone who
regardless of attempts to perform
civility and even at times sometimes
slipped into something that felt like
empathy there is no way that this
project would have ended smoothly for me
if you've been reading that just imagine
what having that for every day my
Twitter account is now private yeah so
the project ended up being published in
book form installed in art galleries as
a sort of visualized timeline of the
experience from sort of initial idea to
the you know the outcomes I then turned
it into a storytelling performance where
I outline the meandering nature of the
project
and then talk about also finally being
unable to publish the accounts of women
I interviewed for fear of their safety
I wrote extensively about the projects
in UCSD based field Journal of socially
engaged art criticism if you want to
learn more because this was also a very
short version and I just want to jump
into the game a game okay so toward the
end of the bank project something I felt
was that was getting in the way of the
work was my performance role the project
did very much ultimately become about my
experience operating in this field
despite my experience I haven't
abandoned the field as you'll see in the
next project or as you experience by
playing the game the game but I'm
putting myself out of the spotlight
through this and making the project less
about my mediation of and intervention
in these spaces and more about creating
an embodied way for people to digest
experiences from and ideologies of these
manosphere seduction communities there's
so much information behavioral
psychology encoded
language in this field and a lot of it
is very painful to process especially if
you're a woman and so with all the
experience I now have mapping the field
as a researcher I'm able to put myself
in a position to filter it all into a
game scenario so that one might actually
walk away being able to make sense of it
without having to spend as much time as
I have and hopefully develop some
tactics to respond to it okay so the
game the game so after completing the
bank project followers of other
seduction gurus reached out to me pretty
often to tell me that reaches variety of
pickup art was much more extreme and
much more misogynistic than other types
that are more focused on teaching men
confidence and self-improvement
to help level the dating playing field I
thought that was totally a valid point
so I decided to take a deeper look into
the variety of pickup artists gurus or
seduction coaches and the differences
between the types of pickup are that
they are teaching and ultimately make a
game about them I just want to give like
a bit of a warning as we go through this
section that there are some mentions of
sexual assault and some evidence of
non-consensual behavior so I'll give you
warnings before I show a particularly
brutal clip but yeah so and the game
itself when you play it gives you a
context warning right away so in case
you didn't get it from the title the
game the game is a play on the
best-selling book by neil strauss the
game which was the first mainstream
primer into this world which originated
as a couple of guys with a community
forum and turned into a very lucrative
lifestyle for some so I made sort of a
playable version of this book in a way
but looking at the entire field not just
the specific artists pickup artists
represented in the book the first
chapter of the game the game which is on
display here not the full-length version
because it's still in process it was
first exhibited as an installation with
research materials at the New York City
new media gallery transfer the banshee
actually I'm going to play this and talk
over it down so the van Shu Shu
coordinated mostly by Jamie Stewart
composed the soundtrack to the game of
the game so when you play it it has a
very moody very dark and intense musical
score and yeah I just wanted to give
them some credit and help get you into
the psychic space hope the rest I'm
going to talk about okay there's so much
more over there so the game the game is
in my mind a thoroughly research-based
video game project in which I study the
different seduction techniques of famous
pickup artists and allow these pickup
artists to speak for themselves through
their work and put players in the
position of interacting with them in a
very common location for pickup art a
bar players regardless of personal
gender identity are put into the
position of experiencing a common
scenario that some presenting people
experience having their personal space
invaded when it's unwelcome by men who
feel entitled to it chapter one focuses
on research material from infamous
pickup artists Julian blogs first major
multi DVD training program pimp is more
recent video program shift and 10-game
this is what the pimp program cost now
quite a discount from its original price
tag all of the dialogue in the game is
constructed from actual word-for-word
advice written by these pickup artists
and also situations from their own
hidden-camera footage that they sell to
their devoted followers a lot of these
coaching materials are prohibitively
expensive and not available in full
online I hypothesize to keep people who
aren't looking to learn from them from
finding out about them because there are
some ethical questions there but I got a
grant so I bought a bunch of them so I'm
going to show an example of an excerpt
from one of Julian Blanc's videos from
pimp including an infield hidden-camera
video
and again I just want to mention that
there it's not particularly graphic but
he is perform in a way that I would
categorize as distinctly non-consensual
so I will I certainly won't be offended
if you don't want to see it okay here we
go
so when I'm like you know what after
party let's go I'm going to throw in the
word now okay but you know what after
party now home and I will order and
command now now so when I'm like you
know what after party let's go
I'm gonna throw in the word now okay but
you know what after party now both and I
will order and command now now okay
listen you don't have to if you don't
want to but let's go now okay we get a
long right after party
now adventure now let's go now this
second now this section now okay I'm
gonna hammer that [__] in I'll also do
like you know what's after party because
otherwise I have to go okay it has to
happen now okay so keep that in mind
take the responsibility off of the girl
and create a sense of urgency thinking
of I really yeah we're doing it whenever
cigarette you [__] like that Julian is
that question right here we have some
Dorian common apology why do we have any
comment you right next time what it's
like profession more Erickson LT I'll
hide it I've masked their shoulders she
won't see get out of time that's the
season stay real faster sir my god fun
real Christmasy yeah you don't okay we
already kissed it's too late give real
kiss free dinner
redemption it's like a video game
redemption are you gonna cheat on a she
kiss no that's a good point
am I gonna cheat on a [__] you already
cheated you already cheated you got a
fiance I'm a city kid is that really
what you want
rich minutes I tell you about I'll hug
you like you give me hot dog day okay
listen to me
how long are ya got it okay kiss no no
no no please my friends talking so this
pretty much covers you know like
aligning the emotional side of her brain
with the logical side of her brain like
a minute so I'm going to close up but I
showed that video you know not to shock
you or anything like that but to
illustrate that this moment presented in
Julian's hidden-camera footage is
represented in the game as a player if
you continue to engage with him to the
point that you end up outside of the bar
and are invited to leave the venue with
him even when you push back you may be
physically moved around and touched
sexually without your consent this is
not me inventing what Julian is like in
any way and that's very important to me
but rather presenting him in his
behaviors in the ways that he has
presented them himself to his curated
audience after each interaction you're
prompted with a series of options but
you can experience that for yourself if
you like yeah and after as a player and
the target of pickup artists attention
you can make a broad range of decisions
in Chapter one of the game the game from
opting to hook up with different pickup
artists in multiple locations to
attempting to get away from them
immediately and it's not particularly
moralizing you can do any of these
things but it is through the perspective
that particularly Julian has explained
how it would happen so yeah it's not
finished so before chapter is not just
one and have all these other pickup
artists and hopefully get distributed in
more of a gaming context ultimately
these are just some stills the game was
made from hundreds of handmade and
digitally manipulated cyanotypes
so here's some of them real quick some
on paper some on ceramic tile
and this is what it looks like when
they're combined I really wanted the
game to feel experientially not like any
other game and that's why I brought back
some of my backgrounds and more
traditional art processes rather than
the sort of all-digital sprite page
based RPG look that I initially planned
anyway so yeah it'll be released online
soon hopefully by the end of 2017 please
do play it in the exhibition I also want
to add that it's actually also quite
funny in some ways I know it's not it
doesn't the way that I explained it here
is very particular but for example
Julien is obsessed with Twilight and the
Vampire Diaries series and has a great
deal of pickup lines involving these
things it's just that in my presentation
about it here sometimes this field seems
very easy to dismiss as not real or as
trivial and so in this talk I really
wanted to share with you some of the
gravity of the situation by seeing it in
practice thank you
[Applause]